[Music]
good morning welcome to breakfast with
rachel burden
and charlie state our headlines today
garden salutes will take place across
the uk to mark the death of the duke of
edinburgh
at the age of 99. details about the
duke's funeral
are due to be released later as the
royal family mourns the loss of a
beloved husband
and father if you were having problems
you could always go to him and know that
he would listen
and try to help i think he'd probably
want to be
remembered as
you know as an individual his own right
really
the man and his legacy this morning on
breakfast
will speak to personal friends of the
duke and those whose lives he touched
the sporting world has been paying its
own tributes to the duke there was a
minute silence before last night's
premier league match at fulham
where the players wore black armbands
and that was the case for the jockeys
trainers officials
at aintree where there will be further
tributes paid ahead of the grand
national which does
still go ahead today
[Music]
good morning it's saturday the 10th of
april the armed forces will lead a
second day of tributes to the duke of
edinburgh who died yesterday
aged 99 with gun salutes across the uk
in gibraltar and from warships at sea
details of his funeral
are also expected to be announced later
prince philip was the longest-serving
royal consult
in british history and was a constant
support to the queen during more than
70 years of marriage in a special
programme on breakfast this morning we
will be looking back on his life
with some of those who knew the duke
well the people whose lives were touched
by his charitable endeavors and
public duties and we'll discuss how his
legacy will live on
first though our royal correspondent
nicholas whitchell has this report
windsor castle where the duke spent much
of the past year in isolation with the
queen
where he died yesterday morning and
where it's expected his funeral will
take place in saint george's chapel
in about a week from now further details
of the arrangements are expected to be
given by buckingham palace later today
the duke's death will be a grievous loss
for the queen after their 73 years of
marriage
last night on a bbc program their eldest
children
paid tribute to him i think he'd
probably want to be
remembered as
you know as an individual in his own
right really
his appreciation of how he could help
queen
always seem to be present in terms of
supporting her because she was
very young when she became queen and it
needed to be i think
a double act for a lot of that time
in order to allow her to take on that
role
it was in august 2017 on the forecourt
of buckingham palace that the duke
carried out his final solo engagement
inspecting a parade by the royal marines
it was pouring with rain yet the duke
who was then 96
was not to be deterred duty came first
that day
as it had for so many decades so often
alongside the queen
but also pursuing his own public program
to which he brought his own
famously forthright style
but the public image of the duke walking
a few paces behind his wife
only tells part of the story his
greatest contribution was the unseen
support he gave to the queen as she
coped with the often solitary role of
head of state
occasionally she alluded to it he is my
constant
strength and guide she said during the
diamond jubilee
he was the one person she could always
turn to
just before his 90th birthday the duke
had said in a bbc interview
that he felt it was time to wind down i
reckon i've done my bit i i want to
enjoy myself from be
bitten with less
responsibility less frantic rushing
about
less preparation less trying to think of
something to
say yet it wasn't until
six years later and that parade in the
pouring rain on the forecourt of
buckingham palace
that there was any real evidence that he
was retiring
now the queen must continue without him
the world will pay
its tributes to a man of strong
personality
who made a significant contribution to
the nation's life
and his family will mourn a much-loved
father
grandfather great-grandfather and
husband
nicholas witchell bbc news
well we're joined now outside windsor
castle by our royal correspondent sarah
campbell
and from buckingham palace our reporter
sangeeta maiska but first
sarah windsor is really going to be the
center of activity in the coming days
what are the plans what do we know so
far
well yes indeed good morning to you the
royal standard is flying above windsor
castle which of course means the queen
is here
the castle of course the place where she
and prince philip really spent the final
months of his life they were shielding
here during lockdown and
people have been commenting on the fact
that perhaps actually they managed to
spend more time together
alone in his final few months than
otherwise would have done and it's hoped
that some comfort to the queen as she
contemplates looking
forward now after losing her life
partner her partner of 73 years
of marriage as far too many people
who've lost loved ones over the last
year will know
decisions have to be made about the
funeral arrangements
and the queen is approving those at the
moment the details are expected
to be released later today plans have
been in place for years
as as to how to mark the passing of such
an important public figure but the
pandemic has required
changes to those plans it's been made
very clear that
uh any event which might draw a crowd is
to be avoided
and coveted restrictions will be
observed at all time there'll be no
lying in state there will be no
state funeral as i say exact details
later and also later today at midday
there will be
a death gun salute 41 rounds
that's one every minute for 40 minutes
will be fired
in cities across the uk and gibraltar
and on various
ships at sea now gun salutes are a
traditional way to mark a significant
royal event but will be particularly
poignant today bearing in mind prince
philip's very strong association with
the armed
forces just a couple of other points the
government and the royal family are
requesting that people don't
gather at royal residences we saw that
yesterday people very keen to come
together and share their thoughts about
prince philip
they're also asking that maybe a
donation to charity be given rather than
lay
flowers and there is a book of
condolence that's now
live on the royal website and people are
being asked to leave their
messages of thanks perhaps to the duke
for his
seven decades of service and of course
messages of support
for the queen sarah campbell thank you
well let's go to buckingham palace now
sangeetha maisuka is there for us this
morning
i'm mindful of what sarah was saying
just a moment ago about the
official advice the rules that exist of
course around travel around social
distancing
and that is what people are being
advised but nonetheless
i know that many flowers have been laid
where you are tell us a little more
that's right we saw a steady stream of
people arrive here yesterday charlie
throughout the day
uh laying flowers laying wreaths uh most
of those have now been
removed overnight and i think that's
part of what you're saying
the palace very conscious that we are
still in the middle of a pandemic
and wanting to nod to people not to turn
up here in large numbers
what does however remain are some of the
many messages that were tied to the
palace gates and they are
really very touching most of them
nodding towards prince philip's
time as a royal navy officer and also
the years
73 years he spent by the queen side in
public service let me read a couple of
them to you thank you prince philip for
your wonderful years
and service to the our beloved queen
family
nation and commonwealth you have left a
legacy of helping
to make the world a better place another
one
fair winds and following seas that of
course that phrase often used
by sailors nevertheless people have been
arriving
throughout the night including this
family who wanted to come and leave
flowers
for the prince we're all quite cut up
about it really i mean i know he'd been
sick for a while but when it actually
happens it's different isn't it
um so yeah it was it was a sad moment
and obviously we
talked to the family and decided we
wanted to come down and
and you know visit and pay our respects
and and lay some flowers for him
if you take a look over my shoulder you
will of course see the flag now flying
at half mast and
you can probably also make out the
balcony upon which
uh prince phillips stood by the queen
for so
many years through celebrations and
commemorations
i certainly have been here on many
occasions seeing the royal family waving
that was part of our our national life
our national picture i think today
charlie
people's thoughts will be moving towards
the queen
as she now comes to terms with being a
widow
thank you for the moment thank you very
much
the most senior officer in the royal
navy has also paid tribute to prince
philip the duke of edinburgh was himself
a veteran having been
one of the youngest first lieutenants in
the royal navy
firstly lord and chief of the naval
staff admiral certoni radekin
says the duke will be deeply missed
his generous spirit his delight in all
aspects of the naval service
and his deep understanding of our values
standards and ethos made him
such a close friend to the service for
over
eight decades and he will really
be deeply missed by all of us
you